The Project Gutenberg EBook of Take a Can of Salmon, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Take a Can of Salmon

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 4, 2020 [EBook #62846]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAKE A CAN OF SALMON ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                          Take a Can of Salmon


    [Illustration: Salmon salad]

    [Illustration: Salmon]

Salmon has been nourishing the human race and delighting the human
palate since prehistoric times. Today, thanks to modern canning methods,
it is becoming known more widely than ever as a cosmopolitan food fish.
Its delicious flavor and the convenience of the easy-to-store,
easy-to-use can are two good reasons for cooking and serving salmon
frequently. But there are even better reasons. The protein in salmon is
a complete protein, in the same food group as meat and poultry, cheese
and eggs. When you serve salmon, you’re serving the kind of food that
your family needs every day.

You’ll find that most of the recipes in this booklet suggest using the
whole can of salmon, including the liquid, bones, and skin. That’s
because these are good sources of iodine and phosphorus, Vitamin A,
Vitamin D, and the B group vitamins.

From every nutritional standpoint—high protein value, strong vitamin and
mineral content, easy digestibility—salmon is a good food. It is also an
economical food ... and so easy to serve!

If overweight is a problem in your family, you’ll be glad to know that
equal portions of salmon and lamb chops contain about the same amount of
protein but, four ounces of salmon contain only 150 calories while four
ounces of lamb chops contain 450 calories.

While canned salmon is the basic ingredient of many glamorous dishes, it
is delicious if eaten just as it comes from the can, with perhaps a
sprinkling of salt and pepper, some minced onion and mayonnaise. Salmon
sandwiches made this way when you were a child were always a treat, and
they’re still favorites for school lunch boxes. And haven’t you made use
of the cool look that salmon gives to summer salads? By the way, recipes
for the salad opposite, and for the Salmon Buffet on our cover, are on
page 16.

Each recipe in this booklet has been prepared imaginatively to open your
eyes to the versatility of salmon and the excitement it brings to dinner
menus, party refreshments, and luncheon dishes. Try one today!




                       SALMON APPETIZERS AND DIPS
                          (RECIPES ON PAGE 16)


    [Illustration: Salmon appetizers and dips]

The canned salmon that comes to your table was caught in the waters of
Alaska, Puget Sound or the Columbia River of the Pacific Northwest. It
is a popular food all over the United States, partly because it is so
easily adaptable to regional tastes and fits in so well with every local
culinary tradition. In this booklet we have suggested a number of
recipes of regional interest—yet all of them will fit in with your own
meal planning wherever you live. First, look at these dishes ... smart
for a luncheon or cocktail party in New York—or anywhere!

    [Illustration: New York loves party food like this!]




                             SALMON MOUSSE


    [Illustration: Salmon mousse]


ASPIC

  1 tablespoon unflavored gelatine
  2 tablespoons cold water
  1 chicken bouillon cube
  1 cup boiling water

Soften gelatine in cold water for 5 minutes. Dissolve bouillon cube in
boiling water. Add hot bouillon to gelatine and stir until dissolved.
Pour into a 1½-quart mold; chill until firm.


MOUSSE

  3 cans (7¾ ounces each) salmon
  ½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 tablespoon grated onion
  1 teaspoon horse-radish
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Dash pepper
  2 tablespoons unflavored gelatine
  ½ cup salmon liquid and water
  1 cup whipping cream
  Salad greens
  1 hard-cooked egg

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Add mayonnaise, parsley, lemon juice,
onion, horse-radish, salt, and pepper. Mix well. Soften gelatine in
salmon liquid for 5 minutes. Stir over hot water until dissolved. Add to
salmon mixture and blend thoroughly; an electric mixer or blender may be
used. Whip cream; fold into salmon mixture. Place over congealed aspic;
chill until firm. Unmold on salad plate. Garnish with salad greens and
hard-cooked egg. Serves 6.




                             SALMON CHOWDER


    [Illustration: Salmon chowder]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 chicken bouillon cube
  1 cup boiling water
  ¾ cup chopped onion
  ½ cup chopped green pepper
  1 clove garlic, finely chopped
  ¼ cup butter or other fat, melted
  ⅓ cup salmon liquid
  1 pound can tomatoes
  1 can (8 ounces) whole-kernel corn
  1 cup sliced okra (optional)
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon thyme
  Dash pepper
  1 whole bay leaf

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Dissolve
bouillon cube in boiling water. Cook onion, green pepper, and garlic in
butter until tender. Combine all ingredients and cook for 15 minutes or
until vegetables are tender. Remove bay leaf. Serves 6.

    [Illustration: New Orleans flavor in your own kitchen]




                          SALMON CREPES BAYOU


    [Illustration: Salmon crepes bayou]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 teaspoon chopped onion
  3 tablespoons butter or other fat, melted
  ¼ cup flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Dash white pepper
  Dash nutmeg
  1½ cups salmon liquid and milk
  2 egg yolks, beaten
  2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese
  2 tablespoons sherry
  12 crepes
  2 lemon slices, cut into sixths
  Parsley

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick, stirring constantly. Stir a little of the hot sauce
into egg yolk; add to remaining sauce, stirring constantly. Add cheese
and sherry and stir until blended. Mix ½ cup of the sauce with the
salmon. Blend well. Reserve remaining sauce to serve with crepes. Spread
about 2 tablespoons of salmon mixture on each crepe. Roll like a jelly
roll. Place crepes on a cooky sheet, 15 x 12 inches. Heat in a moderate
oven, 350°F., for 10 to 15 minutes. Heat the sauce.

Arrange the crepes in a circle in a chafing dish. Garnish each crepe
with lemon and parsley. Place sauce in the center of the crepes. Serves
6.


CREPES

  ¾ cup sifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 eggs, beaten
  1 cup milk

Sift dry ingredients together. Combine egg and milk. Add gradually to
flour and salt; stir only until batter is smooth. Drop 2 tablespoons of
batter onto a hot greased griddle or frying pan. Fry about 2 minutes or
until crepe is browned on the underside, turn, and fry until the bottom
is browned. Makes 12 crepes.

    [Illustration: Hearty dishes from Chicago]




                              SALMON CURRY


    [Illustration: Salmon curry]

  1 pound can salmon
  ¼ cup chopped onion
  3 tablespoons butter or other fat, melted
  3 tablespoons flour
  1½ teaspoons curry powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  Dash pepper
  2 cups salmon liquid and milk
  3 cups cooked rice

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Cook
onion in butter until tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon
liquid gradually and cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add salmon;
heat. Serve over rice with any of the following curry condiments. Serves
6.

Curry condiments: chopped hard-cooked egg whites; shredded toasted
coconut; chopped nuts; chopped green pepper; chopped tomatoes; fried
noodles; chopped onions; crystallized ginger; sieved hard-cooked egg
yolks.




                        SALMON RICE WITH KEBABS


    [Illustration: Salmon rice with kebabs]

  1 pound can salmon
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
  ⅔ cup water
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed consommé
  1 cup uncooked rice
  18 mushrooms
  3 green peppers
  3 tomatoes
  ½ cup butter or margarine, melted

Drain salmon. Break salmon into large pieces. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Add water and consommé; bring to a boil. Place rice, salmon, and
consommé mixture in a well-greased, 2-quart casserole. Stir. Bake,
covered, in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 35 minutes or until rice is
tender. While rice is baking, wash mushrooms, green peppers, and
tomatoes. Cut tomatoes and green peppers into sixths. Remove stems from
mushrooms. Alternate tomatoes, mushrooms, and green peppers on 6
skewers, 7 inches each. Place on a greased broiler pan. Brush kebabs
with butter. Broil about 3 inches from source of heat for 3 minutes.
Turn carefully; brush other side with butter and broil 3 minutes longer.
Serve salmon-rice mixture on a platter with kebabs over top. Serves 6.




                          SALMON BROCCOLI PIE


    [Illustration: Salmon broccoli pie]

  1 pound can salmon
  ¼ cup butter or margarine
  ¼ cup flour
  ½ teaspoon thyme
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  2 cups salmon liquid and milk
  1 can (4 ounces) chopped mushrooms, drained
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley
  1½ cups cooked, drained, chopped broccoli
  1 cup pastry mix

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Melt
butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly. Add mushrooms,
parsley, and salmon. Spread broccoli in a 9-inch pie pan. Pour salmon
mixture over broccoli. Prepare pastry mix as directed. Roll dough to
form a 10-inch circle. Place dough over salmon mixture. Double edge of
pastry over and pinch with fingers to make an upright rim. Cut top to
allow steam to escape. Bake in a hot oven, 425°F., for 20 to 25 minutes
or until brown. Serves 6.

    [Illustration: Delightful dishes for Anywhere, U.S.A.!]




                            SALMON CASSOULET


    [Illustration: Salmon]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 cup uncooked elbow macaroni
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  1 small clove garlic, finely chopped
  ⅓ cup butter or other fat, melted
  ⅓ cup flour
  2 teaspoons powdered mustard
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  2 cups salmon liquid and milk
  1 cup grated cheese
  1 cup cooked lima beans

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook macaroni as directed
on the package. Drain. Cook green pepper and garlic in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add cheese and continue cooking
until cheese melts, stirring constantly. Arrange half of the macaroni,
lima beans, salmon, and sauce in layers in a well-greased, 2-quart
casserole. Repeat layers. Bake, in a moderate oven, 350°F, for 25 to 30
minutes. Serves 6.




                           SALMON FLORENTINE


    [Illustration: Salmon florentine]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 cup cooked, drained spinach
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  Dash nutmeg
  2 tablespoons chopped onion
  1 clove garlic, finely chopped
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
  3 tablespoons flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1¼ cups salmon liquid and milk
  2 tablespoons sherry
  ¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
  3 hard-cooked eggs, sliced
  Watercress

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Mash salmon. Chop spinach. Season with
butter, pepper, and nutmeg. Spread seasoned spinach in a well-greased,
round baking dish, 8 × 2 inches. Cook onion and garlic in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and salt. Add salmon liquid gradually and cook
until thick, stirring constantly. Add sherry and salmon. Blend
thoroughly. An electric mixer or blender may be used. Place over
spinach. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 20
to 25 minutes. Garnish with egg slices and watercress. Serves 6.




                             SALMON BURGERS


    [Illustration: Salmon burgers]

  1 pound can salmon
  ½ cup chopped onion
  ¼ cup butter or other fat, melted
  ⅓ cup salmon liquid
  ⅓ cup dry bread crumbs
  2 eggs, beaten
  ¼ cup chopped parsley
  1 teaspoon powdered mustard
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup dry bread crumbs
  6 round buttered buns
  Lemon wedges

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Add salmon liquid, crumbs, egg, parsley, mustard, salt, and
salmon. Mix well. Shape into 6 cakes and roll in crumbs. Place cakes in
a heavy frying pan which contains about ⅛ inch of fat, hot but not
smoking. Fry at moderate heat. When cakes are brown on one side, turn
carefully and brown the other side. Cooking time approximately 5 to 8
minutes. Drain on absorbent paper. Place cakes in buns. Serve with lemon
wedges. Serves 6.

    [Illustration: A favorite in Seattle; great as all outdoors]




                       SALMON CABBAGE VINAIGRETTE


    [Illustration: Salmon cabbage vinaigrette]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 quart shredded cabbage
  ¼ cup chopped onion
  ¼ cup chopped parsley
  2 hard-cooked eggs, chopped
  Vinaigrette dressing
  18 large cabbage leaves

Drain and flake salmon. Combine cabbage, onion, parsley, eggs, and
salmon. Add vinaigrette dressing and mix thoroughly. Serve in the center
of a cabbage rosette. Serves 6.


VINAIGRETTE DRESSING

  1 teaspoon salt
  Dash cayenne pepper
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  3 tablespoons vinegar
  ½ cup olive or salad oil
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  1 tablespoon chopped sweet pickle
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper

Combine salt, cayenne pepper, and paprika. Add vinegar and oil slowly,
beating thoroughly. Add pimiento, sweet pickle, and green pepper. Serves
6.




                              SALMON LOUIS


    [Illustration: Salmon louis]

  1 pound can salmon
  1 head lettuce
  2 tomatoes, cut in sixths
  Louis dressing
  2 hard-cooked egg yolks, sieved

Drain and flake salmon. Shred lettuce and place in a shallow salad bowl.
Arrange salmon over the lettuce. Around the edge place the tomatoes.
Serve with Louis dressing and hard-cooked egg yolk. Serves 6.


LOUIS DRESSING

  ½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  2 tablespoons whipping cream
  2 tablespoons chili sauce
  2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  2 tablespoons chopped green onions
  2 hard-cooked egg whites, chopped
  1 tablespoon chopped olives
  ½ teaspoon lemon juice
  Dash salt
  Dash pepper

Combine all ingredients and chill. Serves 6.

    [Illustration: Salmon salads delight smart San Francisco—try one
    tonight]




                             SALMON SOUFFLÉ


    [Illustration: Salmon soufflé]

  1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
  ¼ cup butter or margarine
  ¼ cup flour
  ½ teaspoon powdered mustard
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Dash cayenne pepper
  1 cup milk
  6 egg yolks, beaten
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley
  6 egg whites

Drain and flake salmon. Melt butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add
milk gradually and cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly.
Stir a little of the hot sauce into egg yolk; add to remaining sauce,
stirring constantly. Add parsley and salmon. Beat egg whites until
stiff. Fold salmon mixture into egg white. Pour into a well-greased,
2-quart casserole. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 45 minutes or
until soufflé is firm in the center. Serves 6.




                       SALMON SOUTHERN CORNBREAD


    [Illustration: Salmon southern cornbread]

  1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
  1 cup sifted flour
  1 cup cornmeal
  4 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 egg, beaten
  1 cup salmon liquid and milk
  ¼ cup butter or other fat, melted

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Sift together flour,
cornmeal, baking powder, sugar, and salt. Combine egg, salmon liquid,
and butter. Add to dry ingredients and mix just enough to moisten. Stir
in salmon. Place in a well-greased baking dish, 8 × 8 × 2 inches. Bake
in a hot oven, 425°F., for 25 to 30 minutes. Serves 6.

    [Illustration: Miami’s sun inspired this golden corn bread]




                             SALMON BUFFET
                              (FRONT COVER)


  3 cans (7¾ ounces each) salmon
  1 head endive
  3 lemon slices
  Capers
  3 hard-cooked eggs, quartered, and deviled
  1 cucumber, sliced crosswise
  6 cauliflower flowerettes
  6 ripe olives
  1 carrot, cut into strips

Drain salmon, being careful not to break cylindrical shape. Separate and
wash endive. Arrange on a serving platter. Place the 3 salmon cylinders
in a row in the center of the platter. Garnish salmon with lemon slices
and capers. Arrange remaining ingredients around salmon. Serves 6.




                              SALMON SALAD
                          (INSIDE FRONT COVER)


  1 pound can salmon
  1 head leaf lettuce
  1 bunch watercress
  1 hard-cooked egg
  Salad oil
  Vinegar

Drain salmon. Break salmon into large pieces. Separate lettuce and
watercress. Wash. Line salad bowl with lettuce. Place ¾ of the salmon in
the bowl. Place watercress on top of salmon. Sprinkle with remaining
salmon. Cut hard-cooked egg almost through lengthwise into sixths. Place
in center of watercress and spread open. Serve with salad oil and
vinegar. Serves 6.




                          APPETIZERS AND DIPS


SALMON SOUR CREAM DIP

  1 pound can salmon
  ½ teaspoon salt
  3 drops tabasco
  1 teaspoon grated onion
  1 cup sour cream
  1 tablespoon drained red caviar
  Assorted crackers

Drain and mash salmon. Blend in salt, tabasco, and onion. Fold in sour
cream. Chill. Garnish with caviar. Serve with crackers. Makes about 1
pint of dip.


SALMON APPETIZER

  1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
  1 head endive
  1 teaspoon lemon juice
  Dash pepper
  Onion rings
  Capers

Drain salmon, being careful not to break cylindrical shape. Separate and
wash endive. Arrange in a serving dish. Place the salmon cylinder in the
center of the dish. Moisten with lemon juice and sprinkle with pepper.
Garnish with onion rings and capers. Serves 6.


SALMON AVOCADO SPREAD

  1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
  1 avocado
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 tablespoon olive or salad oil
  1 clove garlic, finely chopped
  1½ teaspoons grated onion
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 drops tabasco
  Crackers

Drain and flake salmon. Peel avocado and remove seed. Grate avocado
using a medium grater. Combine all ingredients. Toss lightly. Serve with
crackers. Makes about 1 pint of spread.


SALMON CURRIED EGGS

  1 pound can salmon
  ⅔ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  1 tablespoon chili sauce
  1 teaspoon chopped pimiento
  1 teaspoon chopped green pepper
  1 teaspoon grated onion
  ¼ teaspoon curry powder
  1½ dozen hard-cooked eggs
  Parsley

Drain and mash salmon. Add mayonnaise, chili sauce, pimiento, green
pepper, onion, and curry powder. Blend. Chill. Cut eggs in half
lengthwise and remove yolks. Place salmon mixture in egg whites. Garnish
with parsley. Makes 36 canapes. Use egg yolks in other appetizers.




                              SALMON TART
                              (BACK COVER)


  1 pound can salmon
  1 cup pastry mix
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley
  4 eggs, beaten
  1½ cups salmon liquid and coffee cream
  ½ teaspoon salt

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Prepare pastry mix as
directed. Roll and line a 9-inch pie pan. Spread salmon in pie shell.
Cook onion in butter until tender. Sprinkle parsley and onion over
salmon. Combine eggs, salmon liquid, and salt. Pour over salmon. Bake in
a moderate oven, 350°F., for 35 to 45 minutes or until pie is firm in
the center. Serves 6.




                           SALMON TETRAZZINI
                              (BACK COVER)


  1 pound can salmon
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  2 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Dash pepper
  Dash nutmeg
  2 cups salmon liquid and milk
  1 tablespoon sherry
  2 cups cooked spaghetti
  1 can (4 ounces) sliced mushrooms, drained
  2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese
  2 tablespoons dry bread crumbs
  Watercress

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Melt
butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly. Add sherry. Mix half
of the sauce with the spaghetti and mushrooms. Place in a well-greased,
2-quart casserole. Mix remaining sauce with salmon. Place in center of
spaghetti. Combine cheese and crumbs; sprinkle over top of salmon
mixture. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 25 to 30 minutes. Garnish
with watercress. Serves 6.




                              SALMON PASTA
                              (BACK COVER)


  1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
  1 pound ricotta cheese
  12 large pasta shells
  3 quarts boiling water
  1 tablespoon salt
  3 tablespoons butter or margarine
  3 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Dash pepper
  Dash nutmeg
  1 cup milk
  1 cup cooked, drained spinach
  ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
  Parsley

Drain and flake salmon. Add cheese and mix well. Cook pasta shells in
boiling salted water for 45 minutes or until tender. Drain. Rinse with
water to remove excess starch. Melt butter; blend in flour and
seasonings. Add milk gradually and cook until thick and smooth, stirring
constantly. Chop spinach. Add spinach and blend thoroughly. An electric
mixer or blender may be used. Pour sauce into a well-greased baking
dish, 8 × 8 × 2 inches. Fill pasta shells with salmon mixture and
arrange over spinach. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a moderate oven,
350°F., for 30 minutes. Garnish with parsley. Serves 6.


_Two 14-minute, sound, color, 16 mm. motion pictures, “Salmon—Catch to
Can” and “Take a Can of Salmon,” may be borrowed, free of charge, by
writing to the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, U. S. Department of the
Interior, Washington 25, D.C._


                            Circular No. 60
  U.S. Department of the Interior—Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of
                          Commercial Fisheries
  This publication made possible through private contribution from the
  Canned Salmon Institute, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. Photographs by
                    Seranne & Gaden, New York City.
 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
               Office, Washington 25, D.C. Price 25 cents

    [Illustration: SALMON TETRAZZINI · SALMON TART · SALMON PASTA]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Take a Can of Salmon, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAKE A CAN OF SALMON ***

***** This file should be named 62846-0.txt or 62846-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/8/4/62846/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

